---
layout: post
title: Cognitive bias and software engineering. Part 1
---

Programmers are people, and people have cognitive biases. 
Because we have such biases,
it's likely that some of our beliefs
about how we should work as programmers should be scrutinized
to see if we're doing things that seem good, but are just slowing
us down or making or code worse.

In this post, I'll look at one such irrationality, the instinct we
have to believe that if something was more work for us, the outcome
was better.

<!--more-->

The "harder is better" heuristic
-----------

Dan Ariely describes an experiment he performed where the subjects are given
an origami model to make. As
a way of measuring what value the subjects place on the finished model,
they're asked how much money they think it could be sold for.

The subjects are secretly divided into two groups: group A are given clear instructions to follow,
group B given incomplete or ambiguous instructions. The models from group A are
better than those for group B, but group B, who had
to work harder to build their models, on average think their output is
intrinsically more valuable.

The conclusion drawn is that the more work he have to put into some piece
of work, the more we value the outcome. As software engineers, this introduces
the possibility of an inefficiency we may impose on ourselves: we do extra work
because the cost of that work is less than the
(totally imaginary) extra value it produces.

I find it a plausible hypothesis, and I'll describe some situations where I think
the bias may be affected our judgement. Be warned that they're controversial. Perhaps
that's inevitable if we're talking about irrationality.

### Examples

The examples should be interpreted as a call to look more closely at a belief,
because it aligns with the hard-is-better heuristic. It's not my opinion that
all of the beliefs are false, only that we should be suspicious of them.

As a first example, most of us, at some point in our careers, have had the tendency to
prematurely abstract code, or to generalize the code even though it's solving
a specific problem. For sure it feels good to do so, like solving
a puzzle. However the hard-is-better heuristic tells us that it's likely that
we're over-valuing the over-abstracted result.

Another example would be the modern appearance of category
theory in functional programming practice. While monads are a natural conclusion
to a line of reasoning that starts from the belief that side-effects should be
tightly controlled, it's clear that they're hard to understand. Might this cause
people to think the resulting monad-using code is better
than it is? Even if you believe that it's still better to use a monadic
style of programming than not, it's worth considering.

A third example is having strong conventions around
formatting of comments, for example, in Javadoc (although I've seen similar
rules in some Python dialects). Again, we can feel good that we're putting
extra work in writing out comments, and the work is almost mindless, making
it ideal for our lazy brains. Are there benefits gained from the fixed
style? It's clear that there are. Is it likely that we overvalue the benefits
because it's extra work? I think so.

Using object-oriented modeling for everything is more work than using a mixed
programming model. Whether "everything is an object" is good or bad is debatable,
but we might overvalue the result of finding an object-oriented solution to a
problem that wasn't inherently object-oriented.

Code that handles errors explicitly is more work to write than code that uses
exceptions. We might subsequently think the explicit code is better than it
is.

As a final example that's only indirectly associated with programming: some
text editors are quite hard to use. Might it be that we over-value our work
when we use such complex tools?

### Conclusions

Any time we're doing something in a more complicated or difficult way than
seems immediately necessary, it's worth looking closely at the benefits
of the extra work and making sure that we're not subconciously applying
the hard-is-better heuristic. I've given some examples from my experience
in the previous section, but if you've your own, feel free to tweet them
to me.

I'll look at other cognitive biases in follow-up articles.
